Update content for workflows core concept page (#823)
novuhq/docs: content/docs/platform/concepts/workflows.mdx

Behind the scenes, Novu manages the full lifecycle: subscriber validation, workflow matching, Attachment uploads (if applicable), queuing, job execution, retries, and status tracking.

To learn more about triggering workflows via API, handling payloads, and understanding the request lifecycle, refer to the Triggering Workflows documentation.

## Workflow activity feed

After a workflow is triggered, Novu tracks the full execution process in the Activity Feed. The feed gives you real-time visibility into each step, helping you debug issues, trace delivery problems, and understand how notifications behave in production. Each environment has its separate feed.

You can filter the Activity Feed by workflow name, channel type, time period, or transaction ID to easily find and inspect specific executions.

To learn more about using the Activity Feed, step logs, and error tracing, refer to the Workflow Activity Feed documentation.

## Workflow channel preferences

> When setting up a workflow, you can define channel preferences that determine how notifications are delivered to subscribers. In the Novu dashboard, you can set default preferences for each workflow, specifying which channels, such as email, in-app, SMS, or push, should be used by default during notification delivery.

Reviewer: "Novu dashboard" or "Novu Dashboard"? Previously, you capitalized "Dashboard." 

Be consistent, add it to the style guide.

---
title: 'Workflows'
description: 'Learn what workflows are and how they work in Novu.'
---
import { Tab, Tabs } from 'fumadocs-ui/components/tabs';
import { Accordion, Accordions } from 'fumadocs-ui/components/accordion';

In Novu, a workflow is the blueprint that defines the end-to-end process for delivering a notification to one or more subscribers. It acts as the central logic layer for routing messages across different channels such as email, SMS, in-app, push, or chat and controlling what notification to send, when to send it and through which channels they are sent.

You can think of a workflow as a CI/CD pipeline for notifications or an assembly line:
- The event enters at the start.
- The logic defines how it moves through conditions, waits, and transformations.
- Each step performs a specific action.
- At the end, the user receives one or more messages based on the outcome.

Workflows can be simple:

> * When a user signs up, send them a welcome email.

Reviewer: Use the same bullet type throughout.

Or complex:
* When a payment fails, wait 30 minutes, check the user type, then send an email and an in-app message. If no response in 24 hours, follow up with an SMS message.

It can also be extended further than these depending on your use case.

## Workflow steps

A workflow in Novu is built as a sequence of steps, each representing a distinct action or delivery mechanism. These steps are the building blocks of your notification logic. They determine what happens, when it happens, and how the message is sent to the user.

You define and arrange steps using the Workflow Editor in the Novu Dashboard, where each node on the canvas represents a single step in the execution flow.

Each step operates independently, meaning that if one step fails, others can still succeed. This makes workflows both modular and fault-tolerant.

> ### Types of steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Types of steps

```

Each workflow can contain two types of steps: channel steps and action steps.

> #### Channel steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Channel steps

```

Channel steps deliver the actual notification through one of Novu’s supported channels. Each step contains its own notification template, content editor, and channel-specific settings.

Supported channel types include:

- Email (SendGrid, Mailgun, or SMTP)
- In-App (Inbox component)
- SMS (Twilio)
- Push (Firebase, OneSignal)

> - Chat (For example, Slack, or Microsoft Teams)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Chat (Slack, Microsoft Teams)
```

<Callout type="info">
 While most users rely on the Shared Bridge Endpoint, Novu allows advanced users to host their own Bridge application and define workflows in code using the Novu Framework.
</Callout>

### Building the sequence

The Workflow Editor provides a workflow builder where each step in the notification flow can either be channel steps or action steps.

By default, every workflow has a trigger step, which represents the point of entry, usually an event sent from your backend via API. From there, you add steps to control the flow of delivery.

Workflows are executed top-to-bottom in the order of steps, with optional filters, conditions, and step configurations applied at each point.

### Template editor in workflow

Each channel step in a workflow includes a template editor. This is where you can configure what the user sees or receives, whether that’s an email, an SMS message, or an in-app message.

Each channel step has its own content format:
- **Email**: Subject and body (HTML, Markdown, or text)
- **SMS and Chat**: body-only
- **In-App (Inbox)**: Subject, body, optional CTA buttons, data object

> - **Push**: Subject and body

Reviewer: Is this one also HTML, Markdown, or text? It's confusing that you say that for email but not the others.

### Types of Steps
Each workflow can contain two types of steps:

#### Channel Steps
These steps deliver the actual notification through one of Novu’s supported channels. Each step contains its own notification template, content editor, and channel-specific settings.

**Supported channel types include**:
- Email
- In-App (Inbox Component)
- SMS
- Push
- Chat (For example, Slack, Microsoft Teams)

<Callout type="warn">
  A channel step will only execute if:
  - The subscriber has the required credentials (for example, email, phone number).
  - A valid integration is configured for that channel in the environment.

</Callout>

#### Action Steps

These steps allow you to introduce logic and flow control into the workflow. They don’t send notifications, but instead alter the timing or shape of the delivery pipeline.

Common action steps include:
- **Delay**: Pause the workflow for a fixed amount of time before moving to the next step.
- **Digest**:  Group multiple similar events into a single message (for example “You have 5 new mentions”).

#### Designing multi-channel sequences

> Because steps are chainable, you can build complex notification sequences such as:

Reviewer: This is great, it really illustrates the concept well. However, numbered steps would make it easier to understand that this is a sequence, or turn it into a graphic. Or both, perhaps with the graphic showing each point in the decision tree.

Author: Using "5" instead of "five" was intentional because this is how it appears in the UI.

Reviewer: Makes sense.

- Send an In-App message.
- Wait 24 hours (Delay).
- If the message is unread, send an Email.
- If the subscriber is a premium user, follow up with an SMS.

This allows Novu workflows to adapt to user behavior and preferences while keeping the configuration visual and testable.

> ## Workflows editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflows Editor

```

All workflows in Novu are defined within the Workflow Editor, accessible via the Novu Dashboard. This visual builder allows you to model the sequence of steps that occur when a notification is triggered.

> Workflows created in the dashboard run via Novu’s Shared Bridge Endpoint, a centralized infrastructure that securely handles workflow execution for all customers. This means your app doesn’t need to manage orchestration logic; Novu takes care of triggering, step execution, retries, and delivery flow behind the scenes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflows created in the dashboard run via Novu’s Shared Bridge Endpoint, a centralized infrastructure that securely handles workflow execution for all customers. This means that your app doesn’t need to manage orchestration logic; Novu takes care of triggering, step execution, retries, and delivery flow behind the scenes.
```

<Callout type="info">

>  While most users rely on the Shared Bridge Endpoint, Novu also allows advanced users to host their own Bridge application and define workflows in code using the Novu Framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 While most users rely on the Shared Bridge Endpoint, Novu allows advanced users to host their own Bridge application and define workflows in code using the Novu Framework.
```

</Callout>

> ### Building the sequence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Building the sequence

```

> The Workflow Editor provides a workflow builder where each step in the notification flow can either be Channel steps or Action steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Workflow Editor provides a workflow builder where each step in the notification flow can either be channel steps or action steps.
```

> By default, every workflow has a Trigger step, which represents the point of entry, usually an event sent from your backend via API. From there, you add steps to control the flow of delivery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, every workflow has a trigger step, which represents the point of entry, usually an event sent from your backend via API. From there, you add steps to control the flow of delivery.
```

Workflows are executed top-to-bottom in the order of steps, with optional filters, conditions, and step configurations applied at each point.

> ### Template editor in workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Template editor in workflow

```

> Each channel step in a workflow includes a template editor. This is where you can configure what the user sees or receives, whether that’s an email, an SMS, or an in-app message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each channel step in a workflow includes a template editor. This is where you can configure what the user sees or receives, whether that’s an email, an SMS message, or an in-app message.
```

Each channel step has its own content format:
- **Email**: Subject and body (HTML, Markdown, or text)
- **SMS and Chat**: body-only
- **In-App (Inbox)**: Subject, body, optional CTA buttons, data object
- **Push**: Subject and body

> 'The template editor supports dynamic personalization using variables. You can insert variables using double curly braces `{{ }}` to tailor messages based on subscriber information or payload data.'

Reviewer: Why is this text enclosed in quotes?

For example:
- **Payload variable**:
```txt
Your order {{ payload.orderId }} has been confirmed.
```
- **Subscriber variable**:
```txt
Hello {{ subscriber.firstName }}, your current plan is {{ subscriber.data.plan }}.
```

> Clicking a variable inside the editor reveals a popover where you can:

Reviewer: Do not use "popover." Review Google's guidance to choose a better word. https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#letter-p

Reviewer: I once had a developer call a panel at the bottom a "drawer." Everyone called it a drawer, apparently that is UX designer jargon. Absolutely no user is going to call it a drawer. This is why the writers write the docs. Please use the standard Google style terms to describe the dialog/window/whatever.

Author: Alright

> - Apply Liquid filters to format and transform values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply Liquid.js filters to format and transform values
```

- Use raw Liquid.js syntax for advanced logic and dynamic content

> For a full breakdown of how to use the template editor, personalize messages, and work with Liquid syntax, see the [Template Editor documentation](/platform/workflow/template-editor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a full explanation of how to use the template editor, personalize messages, and work with Liquid syntax, see the [Template Editor documentation](/platform/workflow/template-editor).
```

Reviewer: If this is the format you want to use for link references, then add it to the style guide and use it consistently. Personally, I like "refer" rather than "see," but either works.

For...., see....

> ## Workflow identifier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflow identifier

```

Reviewer: Do they ever call it "workflow ID"? If so, then I would use that phrase in here somewhere to aid users searching for that.

Author: No. it's called Workflow identifier.

Each workflow has a unique `workflow_identifier` used to reference it during API calls. While the workflow name can be changed, the workflow identifier becomes immutable after creating the workflow.

> Workflow identifiers must be unique within your Novu project and are typically lowercase with hyphens.

Reviewer: An example or two would be helpful here.

<Callout type="info">
When naming a workflow, choose a clear, descriptive name that reflects its purpose. This name helps teams distinguish between multiple workflows and maintain clarity as your notification system grows. 
</Callout>

> ## Workflow status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflow status

```

Workflows can exist in one of three states:

|         **Status**           | **What it means**                                                                              |
|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|       `active`               | The workflow is ready to be triggered. Steps are valid, templates are complete, and all required integrations are connected. |
|       `inactive`             | The workflow is paused. It cannot be triggered, but you can still edit its structure or steps.|

> |       `action required`      | The workflow contains one or more errors such as missing required fields or unconnected channels. It can still be triggered. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|       `action required`      | The workflow contains one or more errors, such as missing required fields or unconnected channels. It can still be triggered. |
```

> ## Workflow tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflow tags

```

> Tags are labels that help you organize and group workflows. They don’t affect delivery, but they play a major role in how notifications are filtered, displayed, or managed by both your app and your users via the Inbox Component.

Reviewer: I have seen "Inbox component" and "Inbox Component." Which is correct? Once you find out, add it to the word list in the Novu style guide.

> **Use tags to**:

Reviewer: If you want to emphasize these, then use headings, not bold.

- Group related notifications, for example, `security`, `account-activity`, and `marketing`.
- Support filtered views on your front end; for example, show only promotional messages.
- Categorize workflows for better team visibility and long-term maintainability.

Think of tags as your notification system's folders; they help your team and your users stay organized.

> **Example use cases**:

Reviewer: This might be a good heading.

- **Payment and billing updates**: Confirmations or failed transactions.
- **Order and shipping notifications**: Providing delivery status or tracking details.

## Syncing Workflows between environments
In Novu, syncing a workflow means copying it from one environment (typically development or staging) to another (such as production). This is how you “deploy” workflow changes without having to rebuild them manually across environments.

Instead of editing workflows directly in production, it's best practice to design and test them in a non-production environment first. Once validated, you can sync the workflow to production with a single action.

**When a workflow is synced**:
- A copy is created or updated in the target environment.
- The workflow identifier remains the same, ensuring existing triggers continue to function correctly.
- Any updates to the template, steps, or configuration are reflected in the destination environment.

**Syncing is supported across environments based on your plan**:
- Team plans and above support syncing to any available environment.
- Lower-tier plans support syncing only between development and production.

## Triggering workflows

> Every workflow in Novu is initiated by a trigger, which can be an external event or action that starts the notification flow. Triggers connect real-world events (such as a comment being posted or an order being placed) to a specific workflow using a unique identifier (`workflowId`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every workflow in Novu is initiated by a trigger, which can be an external event or action that starts the notification flow. Triggers connect real-world events, such as a comment being posted or an order being placed, to a specific workflow using a unique identifier, the`workflowId`.
```

    // handle response
}
  ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
  ```go
  package main

import (
  "context"
  novugo "github.com/novuhq/novu-go"
  "github.com/novuhq/novu-go/models/components"
  "log"
)

func main() {
  ctx := context.Background()

  s := novugo.New(
    novugo.WithSecurity("<NOVU_SECRET_KEY>"),
  )

  res, err := s.Trigger(ctx, components.TriggerEventRequestDto{
    WorkflowID: "<WORKFLOW_TRIGGER_IDENTIFIER>",
    Payload: map[string]any{},
    To: components.CreateToSubscriberPayloadDto(
      components.SubscriberPayloadDto{
        SubscriberID: "<UNIQUE_SUBSCRIBER_IDENTIFIER>",
      },
    ),
  }, nil)

  if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
  }

  if res.TriggerEventResponseDto != nil {
    // handle response
  }
}
  ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
  ```py
  import novu_py
from novu_py import Novu

with Novu(
    secret_key="<NOVU_SECRET_KEY>",
) as novu:
    res = novu.trigger(trigger_event_request_dto=novu_py.TriggerEventRequestDto(
        workflow_id="<WORKFLOW_TRIGGER_IDENTIFIER>",
        payload={},
        to=novu_py.SubscriberPayloadDto(
            subscriber_id="<UNIQUE_SUBSCRIBER_IDENTIFIER>",
        ),
    ))

    print(res)
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

> ### Trigger the request lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trigger the request lifecycle

```

When a trigger event is sent to the `/events/trigger` endpoint, the following steps occur:

> - **Subscriber mapping and validation**: Subscribers are identified and validated to ensure they’re eligible to receive the notification.

Reviewer: Should these be numbered steps? Looks like it to me.

- **Workflow validation**: The system checks that the associated workflow is active and valid.
- **Attachment upload** (*if applicable*): Any included attachments are uploaded to storage.
- **Event queuing**: The validated event is added to a queue for efficient processing.

> ### Processing the Trigger event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Processing the Trigger event

```

Once queued, the event is picked up by a worker which handles:

- **Subscriber upsert**: Creates or updates the subscriber using data from the to object.
- **Notification entity creation**: Stores key data about the organization, template, subscriber, and payload.

> - **Job Creation**: Generates jobs based on the workflow’s steps. Each job defines what action to take and on which channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Job creation**: Generates jobs based on the workflow’s steps. Each job defines what action to take and on which channel.
```

> ### Job status lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Job status lifecycle

```

Jobs created during workflow processing transition through several statuses:

| Status     | Description                                                                 |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `PENDING`  | Job is created but not yet added to the queue.                             |
| `QUEUED`   | Job is ready and waiting in the queue.                                     |
| `RUNNING`  | Job is actively being processed.                                           |
| `COMPLETED`| Job finished successfully.                                                 |
| `FAILED`   | Job encountered an error and couldn’t be completed.                        |
| `DELAYED`  | Job is intentionally delayed (e.g., for digests or time-based delays).     |
| `CANCELED` | Job has been manually or programmatically canceled.                        |
| `MERGED`   | Event was merged into another digesting event.                             |
| `SKIPPED`  | Event digesting was skipped, often in backoff scenarios.                   |

> ## Workflow activity feed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflow activity feed

```

Once a workflow is triggered, Novu tracks the full execution lifecycle, from trigger to delivery inside the Activity Feed. This gives you a transparent view into every step of the process, allowing you to debug, trace failures, and understand how your notification logic behaves in production. Each environment has its own workflow activity feed.

> ### Filtering workflow executions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filtering workflow executions

```

To make tracking specific executions easier, the Activity Feed allows you to filter by:

- **Workflow name**: Useful when testing or observing a specific flow across multiple subscribers.
- **Channel type**: See only executions that include Email, SMS, In-App, etc.
- **Time period**: Narrow the view to the last 24 hours, 7 days, 30 days, or a custom range.

> - **Transaction ID**:  If you're logging the `transactionId` returned during a trigger, you can look it up directly for an exact match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Transaction ID**: If you're logging the `transactionId` returned during a trigger, you can look it up directly for an exact match.
```

When a workflow is triggered, the activity feed logs show the following information:

- The workflow identifier (which workflow was triggered).
- The subscriber ID (who it was triggered for).
- A unique transaction ID.

> - Execution status (e.g., completed, failed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Execution status (for example, completed, failed).
```

- The time it was triggered.

> ### Step-level execution logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step-level execution logs

```

Clicking into an execution opens a detailed view that shows exactly what happened in each step:
- When the step was created and queued.
- Provider responses.
- Errors or reasons for failure.

> ## Workflow channel preferences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Workflow channel preferences

```

> When setting up a workflow, you can define channel preferences that determine how notifications are delivered to subscribers. In the Novu dashboard, you can set default preferences for each workflow, specifying which channels, such as Email, In-App, or SMS, should be used by default during notification delivery.

Reviewer: Check capitalization

These defaults ensure that subscribers receive messages through the most appropriate channels, even if they haven’t customized their own preferences.

## Workflow step conditions

> Step Conditions in Novu is used to control whether a step in your workflow should be executed, based on dynamic logic. This lets you create more intelligent and personalized workflows that respond to dynamic user and application data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Step conditions_ in Novu are used to control whether a step in your workflow should be executed based on dynamic logic. This lets you create more intelligent and personalized workflows that respond to dynamic user and application data.
```

Conditions can be based on subscriber fields, payload data, or the results of previous steps. For example, you might skip sending an SMS if the user is already online, or send a follow-up email only if an in-app message hasn’t been read within 24 hours.

Step conditions can be built using a visual query builder that supports advanced logical expressions and dynamic comparisons between fields

> See the [Step Conditions documentation](/platform/workflow/step-conditions) to learn more about all supported condition types, operators, and usage examples.

Reviewer: Use the reference format consistently. "To learn more...., see...."

> ## Frequently asked questions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Frequently asked questions

```

<Accordions type="multiple">

>   <Accordion title="Is it necessary to create a workflow to send notifications?">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <Accordion title="Do I have to create a workflow to send notifications?">
```

    Yes, creating a workflow is mandatory to send notifications.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Can we send notifications without a workflow?">
    No, without workflows, notifications cannot be sent.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Can workflows be managed via code?">
    Yes, if you are using Node.js, you can use the <a href="/framework/quickstart/nextjs">Novu Framework</a>.
  </Accordion>

>   <Accordion title="How can all workflows be synced at once to another environment?">

Reviewer: I would switch this question with the one above so that the two "via code" questions are together.

        SubscriberID: "<UNIQUE_SUBSCRIBER_IDENTIFIER>",
      },
    ),
  }, nil)

  if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
  }

  if res.TriggerEventResponseDto != nil {
    // handle response
  }
}
  ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
  ```py
  import novu_py
from novu_py import Novu

with Novu(
    secret_key="<NOVU_SECRET_KEY>",
) as novu:
    res = novu.trigger(trigger_event_request_dto=novu_py.TriggerEventRequestDto(
        workflow_id="<WORKFLOW_TRIGGER_IDENTIFIER>",
        payload={},
        to=novu_py.SubscriberPayloadDto(
            subscriber_id="<UNIQUE_SUBSCRIBER_IDENTIFIER>",
        ),
    ))

    print(res)
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Trigger the request lifecycle

When a trigger event is sent to the `/events/trigger` endpoint, the following steps occur:

1. **Subscriber mapping and validation**: Subscribers are identified and validated to ensure they’re eligible to receive the notification.
2. **Workflow validation**: The system checks that the associated workflow is active and valid.
3. **Attachment upload** (*if applicable*): Any included attachments are uploaded to storage.
4. **Event queuing**: The validated event is added to a queue for efficient processing.

> ### Processing the Trigger event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Processing the trigger event
```
